LPC932 EXAMPLE:    AUTOCALIBRATION OF INTERNAL LOW POWER OSCILLATOR FOR    
                                   CLOCKING THE UART
Christian Kulig, 12/06/02


INTRODUCTION:
The LPC932 provides a number of features, which help to reduce power 
consumption as well as to minimize external components.

For example, it might be an option for applications in battery powered and 
handheld devices to clock the µC with the internal watchdog timer (WDT). 
(See figure 1) This lowers the power consumption considerably compared to 
the use of an external crystal or the internal RC oscillator. And of 
course, there's no need for the crystal and its two capacitors anymore. 
Thus, applications, which don't need a high clock frequency, can be 
developed more economically.


APPLICATION TO THE UART:
Nevertheless, it's possible to achieve a highly accurate time base if 
required. For example to drive the integrated UART, it's necessary to set 
up a baud rate with a deviation smaller than ±2.5%. Since the watchdog 
oscillators frequency is in a range between -30% and +20% of 400kHz, the 
actual frequency must be measured and considered before setting up the 
particular baud rate. This means the watchdog oscillator has to be 
calibrated. 

Fortunately, the actual frequency is very stable, so that the WDT only 
needs to be calibrated once. The results are written into the EEPROM and 
can be used from then on.

This description shows in detail how to setup the UART as an example, but 
the calibration itself and its results can be used for any other purpose 
requiring an accurate time base.

CALIBRATION PRINCIPLE (See figure 2)
A convenient way to generate a baud rate for the UART is to use the 
internal baud rate generator. It divides the CCLK by a factor that is 
defined by two registers BRG0 and BRG1. If CCLK is fWDT =400kHz and the 
intended baud rate is 9600 the factor should be 42. Obviously, this factor 
is proportional to CCLK and fWDT. 

To get the frequency of the WDT we just have to count watchdog timer 
events (counts, overflows) during a certain period. It's easy to use 
overflows, because they cause an interrupt, which can be used to increment 
a counter. To maximize the accuracy we set up the highest overflow 
frequency, by writing a 0 into the watchdog timer reload register. Now 
every 80µs an overflow occurs. The resulting count value could be used 
directly as the factor for the baud rate generator, but it's advantageous 
to count a value that's 4 times the required factor. By shifting the 
result by 2 digits to right, the LSB error can be removed. 
Now the measurement time is 4x42x80µs = 13.44ms. The result of the 
calibration is as accurate as this time can be measured. 

When the LPC932 is powered up for the first time, it uses the internal RC 
oscillator as its clock source. It has a tolerance of 2.5% over the whole 
temperature range and is better than 0.8% when used at room temperature. 
This tolerance is well suitable for performing the calibration. The RC 
oscillator has a frequency of 7.373Mhz, this means an internal timer 
(e.g. Timer0) increments every 0.271µs. To get a total measurement time 
of 13.44ms it has to count 49547 times until it overflows and causes an 
interrupt. This interrupt must stop all timers  (T0 and WDT) and write 
the current count value into the EEPROM.

Now that the WDT is calibrated, an IAP routine is called to set up the µC 
to use the WDT as its clock source. The last step is to execute a 
software reset to let the new clock settings take effect. 

On further powerups this calibration procedure can be skipped, since the 
EEPROM contains the necessary information. It can be read, shifted right 
by 2 digits and used as the factor for the baud rate generator to clock 
the UART. It can also be used for the prescaler of any other peripheral 
of the LPC932 that needs an accurate time base. 


SOFTWARE EXAMPLE:
The following code implements the calibration of the WDT. It's divided 
into two major parts, so that it's easy to include it in existing 
projects. 

The first four files are a simple example of customer software. It uses 
the UART for receiving a command ('S' = Send Data) from the PC and 
sending back some data. The last two files contain the necessary code, 
which calibrates the watchdog timer. 

To test this example, the LPC932 needs a RS232 interface to a PC, which 
may be provided by the evaluation board. Start the program 
'Hyperterminal' (Start --> Programs --> Accessories --> Communications) 
and set the configuration to 9600 baud, 8 data bits, 1 stop bit, no parity 
bit and no flow control. Then click on 'Wait for Call'. After a power up, 
the programmed device blinks the LEDs on Port 2. That means, it has 
already calibrated the watchdog timer and is using it as the clock source.
By pressing 'S' in Hyperterminal, the LPC932 sends out some data to the 
PC, which are displayed by Hyperterminal.


